.. Copyright (c) 2015-2017 The Botogram Authors (see AUTHORS)
   Documentation released under the MIT license (see LICENSE)

.. _i18n:

======================
Working with languages
======================

Delivering content in a way that users can understand is vital in providing a
good UX. Since a bot could focus on an audience that speaks a particular
language, botogram provides an i18n platform that allows you to translate its
default messages, such as ``/help``'s one, to another language.

.. _i18n-available-translations:

Available translations
======================

The following languages are currently included in the botogram package:

* ``br`` (Brazilian Portuguese)
* ``en`` (English)
* ``it`` (Italian)

.. _i18n-setting-language:

Setting your bot's language
===========================

Botogram bots currently only support using a single language for their messages.
This also means that it is not possible at the moment to translate messages on
a per-user basis.

While bots will use the English translation by default, it is possible to change
the language in use by changing the bot's :py:attr:`botogram.Bot.lang` property
to the target language's code. Please note that the selected language must be
:ref:`supported <i18n-available-translations>` by the botogram version you are
using.

.. code-block:: python

   bot.lang = "it"

After doing this, the bot will start using the translated messages included in
the package. If a message hasn't been translated to the selected language, the
bot will fall back on the English default.

.. _i18n-overriding:

Overriding default messages
===========================

.. versionadded:: 0.5

As described in :ref:`i18n-new-language`, new and updated translations'
availability is limited to new botogram releases, meaning that it could take
some time for them to reach end users.

Packaged translations may also not always fit a specific use case, making it
necessary for you to edit some of the messages. While you could use a custom
build of the package with a modified translation, it is also possible to
programmatically override the translation of single messages through
:py:attr:`botogram.Bot.override_i18n`, a dictionary that works basically the
same way as a ``.po`` file, associating ``msgid``'s to ``msgstr``'s:

.. code-block:: python

   bot.override_i18n = {
        "Use /help to get a list of all the commands.": \
        "Utilizza /help per ottenere la lista di tutti i comandi."
    }

We'll go more in depth on the translation format in the next section.

.. _i18n-new-language:

Translating botogram to a new language
======================================

If your language isn't yet supported by botogram, you can contribute your own
translation by forking the project's `git repository
<https://github.com/pietroalbini/botogram>`_ and opening a new pull request.
See :ref:`install-edge` for instructions on how to clone the repository and
install the required dependencies. It is recommended that you don't install this
bleeding edge clone as a global package: in fact, you can completely avoid
installing it, while building and testing it in a local virtual environment may
be useful in order to catch errors.

Botogram handles i18n via `GNU gettext`_, which stores translations in
plain-text ``.po`` files that are then compiled while installing the package.
You can find the all the translations that are currently included in the package
in the ``i18n/`` directory.

You can generate a new language file with the following command: ::

   $ invoke i18n-new <code>

where ``code`` is the `ISO 639-1 code`_ assigned the language you are
translating to. This will create a new language file located at
``i18n/langs/<code>.po``. The first few line will look like this:

.. code-block:: none

   msgid ""
   msgstr ""
   "Project-Id-Version: botogram 1.0.dev0\n"
   "Report-Msgid-Bugs-To: https://github.com/pietroalbini/botogram/issues\n"
   "POT-Creation-Date: 2017-10-06 19:21+0200\n"
   "PO-Revision-Date: 2017-10-11 15:02+0200\n"
   "Last-Translator: FULL NAME <EMAIL@ADDRESS>\n"
   "Language: de\n"
   "Language-Team: de <LL@li.org>\n"
   "Plural-Forms: nplurals=2; plural=(n != 1)\n"
   "MIME-Version: 1.0\n"
   "Content-Type: text/plain; charset=utf-8\n"
   "Content-Transfer-Encoding: 8bit\n"
   "Generated-By: Babel 2.3.4\n"

The first thing you should do is to fill out the ``Last-Translator`` field with
your contact information. You may also want to do the same with the copyright
notice at the top of the document.

The remainder of the file is were translations are actually defined:

.. code-block:: none

   #: botogram/defaults.py:46
   msgid "Use /help to get a list of all the commands."
   msgstr ""

Each message is assigned a ``msgid`` string which identifies it across
translations: in botogram it is the English translation for that message.
``msgstr`` fields are instead specific to each translation and define that
message's translation for the file's language: this is where you need to enter
your translation. If a ``msgstr`` is empty (as they are by default) botogram
will default to the English translation.

Some messages could contain HTML formatting or
`Python string interpolation`_: your translation should reflect these as closely
as possible. If you need context on the usage of a message, you can refer to its
usages in the source code included in the comment line above each string.

Just to be sure your syntax is correct, you can ensure your translation will
compile correctly by invoking ::

   $ invoke i18n-compile

If the command succeeds there's good chance you didn't mess up anything.

Once you're done, you can commit and push your changes to your fork and propose
them to be merged into the upstream repository to be included in the next
botogram release.

.. _i18n-update-translation:

Updating a translation
======================

As botogram evolves, more message will probably be added to the codebase, and it
is also possible for currently included translations to contain mistakes.

The workflow for updating a translation is basically the same as the one
described in :ref:`i18n-new-language`, but you may also need to use ::

   $ invoke i18n-extract

to extract new messages from the codebase. The command also ensures references
in comments are up-to-date with their current location.

Running the command will always result in the ``.pot`` file and ``.po`` files
being updated, at least for what concerns the ``POT-Creation-Date`` header. You
should check your diff and avoid committing any change that doesn't impact the
actual translation and the source code references in comments.

While trivial, it would be nice if you also changed the ``PO-Revision-Date``
header to reflect your changes.


.. _`GNU gettext`: https://www.gnu.org/software/gettext/

.. _`ISO 639-1 code`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_ISO_639-1_codes

.. _`Python string interpolation`:
   https://docs.python.org/2/library/stdtypes.html#string-formatting
